---
title: "Generative Modeling Reveals the Connection between Cellular Morphology and Gene Expression"
collection: publications
excerpt: 'COSMIC (Cross-modal generation between Single-cell RNA-seq and MICroscopy images) is a bidirectional generative framework that quantitatively links single-cell nuclear morphology and gene expression.'
date: 2026-01-25
venue: 'bioRxiv'
paperurl: 'https://brbiclab.epfl.ch/projects/cosmic/'
---

The understanding of how transcriptional programs give rise to cellular morphology, and how morphological features reflect and influence cell identity and function remains limited. This is due in part to the lack of large-scale datasets pairing the two modalities as well as the absence of computational frameworks capable of modeling their cross-modal structure. Here, we introduce COSMIC, a bidirectional generative framework that enables quantitative decomposition of transcriptional variance reflected in morphology and morphological variance explained by gene expression. COSMIC builds on a foundation model trained on over 21 million segmented nuclei and couples it with existing transcriptomic embeddings. To enable cross-modal learning, we leveraged a newly generated multimodal dataset acquired using IRIS, a technology that captures high-resolution images and transcriptomes from the same single cells at scale. COSMIC accurately modeled cell type identity, as well as continuous dynamics such as cell-cycle progression, establishing a quantitative link between morphological phenotypes and underlying gene expression. In prostate cancer cells, COSMIC identified morphological and transcriptomic differences between chemotherapy drug treatment-responsive and -resistant cells, and revealed morphology-associated genes linked to tumor state. Together, these results demonstrate that generative modeling powered by paired single-cell measurements can capture the bidirectional flow of information between cellular form and gene expression, opening new avenues for mechanistic discovery and predictive modeling in both basic and translational cell biology.
